@astrojs/markdoc (#6209)
withastro/astro: packages/integrations/markdoc/README.md

# @astrojs/markdoc (experimental) 📝

This **[Astro integration][astro-integration]** enables the usage of [Markdoc](https://markdoc.dev/) to create components, pages, and content collection entries.

- <strong>[Why Markdoc?](#why-markdoc)</strong>
- <strong>[Installation](#installation)</strong>
- <strong>[Usage](#usage)</strong>
- <strong>[Configuration](#configuration)</strong>
- <strong>[Examples](#examples)</strong>
- <strong>[Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)</strong>
- <strong>[Contributing](#contributing)</strong>
- <strong>[Changelog](#changelog)</strong>

## Why Markdoc?

> Markdoc allows you to enhance your Markdown with [UI components][astro-ui-frameworks]. If you have existing content authored in Markdoc, this integration allows you to bring those files to your Astro project using content collections.

Author: We suggest using Astro components actually! We should update this.

## Installation

### Quick Install

The `astro add` command-line tool automates the installation for you. Run one of the following commands in a new terminal window. (If you aren't sure which package manager you're using, run the first command.) Then, follow the prompts, and type "y" in the terminal (meaning "yes") for each one.

```sh
# Using NPM
npx astro add markdoc
# Using Yarn
yarn astro add markdoc
# Using PNPM
pnpm astro add markdoc
```

If you run into any issues, [feel free to report them to us on GitHub](https://github.com/withastro/astro/issues) and try the manual installation steps below.

### Manual Install

First, install the `@astrojs/markdoc` package using your package manager. If you're using npm or aren't sure, run this in the terminal:

```sh
npm install @astrojs/markdoc
```

Then, apply this integration to your `astro.config.*` file using the `integrations` property:

__`astro.config.mjs`__

```js ins={2} "markdoc()"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import markdoc from '@astrojs/markdoc';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  integrations: [markdoc()],
});
```

> 

Author: Ah interesting, hadn't added this back. I've personally installed the Markdoc VS Code extension without adding a file association. May need to check if that's also recommended, though adding a note about the extension sounds like a good idea 👍

## Usage

Markdoc files can be used within content collections. Add entries to any content collection using the `.mdoc` extension:

```sh
src/content/docs/
  why-markdoc.mdoc
  quick-start.mdoc
```

> Then, query for these files using the [Content Collection APIs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#querying-collections):

Reviewer: Just checking "query for" ? The entire page of Content Collections, we typically say "query your collection" or "query this collection." (We ony say "query for" once, in a code comment.)

```astro
---
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';

const entry = await getEntryBySlug('docs', 'why-markdoc');
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---

<!--Access frontmatter properties with `data`-->
<h1>{entry.data.title}</h1>
<!--Render Markdoc contents with the Content component-->
<Content />
```

📚 See the [Astro Content Collection docs][astro-content-collections] for more information.

## Configuration

> You can configure how your Markdoc content is rendered using props via the `Content` component. This component is returned by [a content collection `render()` result](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#rendering-content-to-html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the MDX integration is installed, no configuration is necessary to use .mdx files in your Astro project.

You can configure how your Markdoc content is rendered by passing props to the `Content` component.
```
Something like this is more in keeping with the MDX content. We should probably first establish that we're not configuring *the Markdoc integration* itself in any way. Then, we can describe configuring the rendered content specifically. (And, I don't think the second sentence is necessary. It feels more about how content collections work than how this integration does.)

### `config` prop

The `config` prop accepts all [Markdoc configuration options](https://markdoc.dev/docs/config#full-example), including tags and variables.

This example defines a `version` variable to use within a `why-markdoc.mdoc` entry:

```astro
---
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';

const entry = await getEntryBySlug('docs', 'why-markdoc');
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---

<Content
  config={{
    variables: {
      version: '0.0.1',
    }
  }}
/>
```

### `components` prop

The `components` prop defines mappings from an HTML element name to an Astro or UI framework component (React, Vue, Svelte, etc).

> :::note

Reviewer: I'm thinking the note here should go *after* the mapping example, and then should have its own example of creating a wrapper as described. This interrupts the flow of demonstrating what the components prop *can* do.

In fact, instead of a note, if this concept gets its own example, then rather than being an aside, it can be its own h4 section, and a documented example of something people may very well want to do.

```astro
---
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
import Aside from '../components/Aside.astro';

const entry = await getEntryBySlug('docs', 'why-markdoc');
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---

<Content
  components={{
    Aside: Aside,
  }}
/>
```

#### Use client-side UI components

Today, the `components` prop does not support the `client:` directive for hydrating components. To embed client-side components, create a wrapper `.astro` file to import your component and apply a `client:` directive manually.

This example wraps a `Aside.tsx` component with a `ClientAside.astro` wrapper:

```astro
---
// src/components/ClientAside.astro
import Aside from './Aside';
---

<Aside client:load />
```

This component [can be applied via the `components` prop](#render-html-elements-as-astro-components):

```astro
---
// src/pages/why-markdoc.astro
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
import ClientAside from '../components/ClientAside.astro';

const entry = await getEntryBySlug('docs', 'why-markdoc');
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---

<Content
  components={{
    aside: ClientAside,
  }}
/>
```

## Examples

> *   The [Astro Markdoc starter template](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/latest/examples/with-mdx) shows how to use Markdoc files in your Astro project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The [Astro Markdoc starter template](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/latest/examples/with-markdoc) shows how to use Markdoc files in your Astro project.
```

#### Render Markdoc tags as Astro components

You may configure [Markdoc tags][markdoc-tags] that map to components. You can configure a new tag from your `astro.config` using the `tags` attribute.

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import markdoc from '@astrojs/markdoc';

// https://astro.build/config
export default defineConfig({
	integrations: [
		markdoc({
			tags: {
				aside: {
					render: 'Aside',
          attributes: {
            // Component props as attribute definitions
            // See Markdoc's documentation on defining attributes
            // https://markdoc.dev/docs/attributes#defining-attributes
            type: { type: String },
          }
				},
			},
		}),
	],
});
```

Then, you can wire this render name (`'Aside'`) to a component from the `components` prop via the `<Content />` component:

```astro
---
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
import Aside from '../components/Aside.astro';

const entry = await getEntryBySlug('docs', 'why-markdoc');
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---

<Content
  components={{

>     Aside: Aside,

Reviewer: Because these are exactly the same name, and both capitalized, I have to admit I'm not sure which `Aside` is which. I know they're "wired" together, but it's not obvious which one is "defining" the other.

a) They don't *have* to have the same name, right? We can call our component `CustomAside` for example? (Which I think is cleaner than trying to write more words to describe the explicit relationship)

b) I think also seeing an example of this being used in a Markdoc file is useful here. What we can see is that we're rendering "all our Markdoc content, with a custom aside figured". I think then seeing a Markdoc snippet is helpful. In their own docs, their tags seem to be lower case (e.g. the`callout` example). But we have two upper case `Asides`, so I might be confused about using a tag.. do I do lower case becase that seems to be how you write Markdoc? Is it upper case because that's how we've wired it here?

Author: Discussed offline. Changing to the shortened JS object syntax (`components={{ Aside }}`) to follow best practices and assume an intermediate programmer knowledge

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import markdoc from '@astrojs/markdoc';

// https://astro.build/config
export default defineConfig({
	integrations: [
		markdoc({
			nodes: {
				heading: {
					render: 'Heading',
          // Markdoc requires type defs for each attribute.
          // These should mirror the `Props` type of the component
          // you are rendering. 
          // See Markdoc's documentation on defining attributes
          // https://markdoc.dev/docs/attributes#defining-attributes
          attributes: {
            level: { type: String },
          }
				},
			},
		}),
	],
});
```

Now, you can map the string passed to render (`'Heading'` in this example) to a component import. This is configured from the `<Content />` component used to render your Markdoc using the `components` prop:

```astro
---
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
import Heading from '../components/Heading.astro';

const entry = await getEntryBySlug('docs', 'why-markdoc');
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---

> <Content

Reviewer: Should this be passed a `level` prop in this example?

  components={{
    Heading: Heading,
  }}
/>
```

📚 [Find all of Markdoc's built-in nodes and node attributes on their documentation.](https://markdoc.dev/docs/nodes#built-in-nodes)

#### Use client-side UI components

Today, the `components` prop does not support the `client:` directive for hydrating components. To embed client-side components, create a wrapper `.astro` file to import your component and apply a `client:` directive manually.

This example wraps a `Aside.tsx` component with a `ClientAside.astro` wrapper:

```astro
---
// src/components/ClientAside.astro
import Aside from './Aside';
---

<Aside client:load />
```

This component [can be applied via the `components` prop](#render-html-elements-as-astro-components):

```astro
---
// src/pages/why-markdoc.astro
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
import ClientAside from '../components/ClientAside.astro';

const entry = await getEntryBySlug('docs', 'why-markdoc');
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---

<Content
  components={{

>     aside: ClientAside,

Reviewer: Now I'm left wondering why this `aside` is lower case, when the others are upper case. Is this a typo? Were the others? (tbh, this is more what I would have expected!)

Author: Just a typo! Should be uppercase

            const countryToEmojiMap = {
              japan: '🇯🇵',
              spain: '🇪🇸',
              france: '🇫🇷',
            }
            return countryToEmojiMap[country] ?? '🏳'
          },
        },
      },
    }),
  ],
});
```

Now, you can call this function from any Markdoc content entry:

```md
¡Hola {% getCountryEmoji("spain") %}!
```

:::note
These options will be applied during [the Markdoc "transform" phase](https://markdoc.dev/docs/render#transform). This is run **at build time** (rather than server request time) both for static and SSR Astro projects. If you need to define configuration at runtime (ex. SSR variables), [see the next section](#Define-markdoc-configuration-at-runtime).
:::

📚 [See the Markdoc documentation](https://markdoc.dev/docs/functions#creating-a-custom-function) for more on using variables or functions in your content.

### Define Markdoc configuration at runtime

You may need to define Markdoc configuration at the component level, rather than the `astro.config.mjs` level. This is useful when mapping props and SSR parameters to [Markdoc variables](https://markdoc.dev/docs/variables).

> Astro recommends running the Markdoc transform step manually for this. First, install the `@markdoc/markdoc` package into your project:
> 
> ```sh
> # Using NPM
> npx astro add @markdoc/markdoc
> # Using Yarn
> yarn astro add @markdoc/markdoc
> # Using PNPM
> pnpm astro add @markdoc/markdoc
> ```
> 
> Then, call Markdoc's rendering functions where you plan to define your configuration. This example defines an `abTestGroup` Markdoc variable based on an SSR param, transforming the raw entry `body` to ignore `astro.config.mjs` configuration. The result is rendered using the `Renderer` component provided by `@astrojs/markdoc`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro recommends running the Markdoc transform step manually for this. This allows you to define your configuration and call Markdoc's rendering functions in a `.astro` file directly, bypassing `astro.config.mjs`.

You will need to install the `@markdoc/markdoc` package into your project.

```sh
# Using NPM
npx astro add @markdoc/markdoc
# Using Yarn
yarn astro add @markdoc/markdoc
# Using PNPM
pnpm astro add @markdoc/markdoc
```
Now, you can define Markdoc configuration options using `Markdock.transform()`.

This example defines an `abTestGroup` Markdoc variable based on an SSR param, transforming the raw entry `body`. The result is rendered using the `Renderer` component provided by `@astrojs/markdoc`:
```

I just felt the 2nd paragraph here was a little overloaded. So I tried to explain the what/why above, then leave this sentence to just explain exactly what is happening below. Something like this?

Author: Much better yes! 👏
